Update setup instruction with uv (#181)
carpentries-incubator/geospatial-python: learners/setup.md

## Software Setup

[Python](https://python.org) is a popular language for scientific computing, and great for
general-purpose programming as well. There are many ways to install Python and the

> required dependencies. In this workshop, we will use [`uv`](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/) 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
required dependencies. In this workshop, we suggest to use [`uv`](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/) 
```

for its fast and easy installation process. 

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::discussion

### Software Setup using uv

Please follow the instructions below according to your operating system.

Regardless of how you choose to install it, please make sure you install Python
version 3.x (e.g., 3.12 is fine). Also, please set up your python environment at
least a day in advance of the workshop. If you encounter problems with the
installation procedure, ask your workshop organizers via e-mail for assistance so
you are ready to go as soon as the workshop begins.

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

:::::::::::::::: solution

### Linux / MacOS

Open a terminal and install `uv` following the [official installation instructions](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/getting-started/installation/):

```sh
curl -LsSf https://astral.sh/uv/install.sh | sh
```

> Then make sure you are inside the `geospatial-python` directory you created during the data setup step. If not, please do:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then make sure you are inside the `geospatial-python` directory you created during the data setup step by doing:
```

```sh

> cd <path-to-geospatial-python>

Reviewer: We ask them to create the folder on the Desktop, right? So maybe better be explicit here:
 
```suggestion
cd ~/Desktop/geospatial-python
```

```

Finally, run the following command to create a virtual environment and install the required dependencies:

```sh

> uv venv --python=3.12 && uv pip install -r https://raw.githubusercontent.com/esciencecenter-digital-skills/geospatial-python/uv_setup/files/requirements.txt

Reviewer: ```suggestion
uv venv --python=3.12 && uv pip install -r https://raw.githubusercontent.com/carpentries-incubator/geospatial-python/main/files/requirements.txt
```

```

:::::::::::::::::::::::::

:::::::::::::::: solution

### Windows

On Windows, first we install `uv` using PowerShell following the [official installation instructions](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/getting-started/installation/):

```powershell
powershell -ExecutionPolicy ByPass -c "irm https://astral.sh/uv/install.ps1 | iex"
```

> Sometimes after the installation, you may see suggestions powershell terminal like `$env:Path = "C:\Users\username\.local\bin;$env:Path"` This means you need to manually add the `uv` executable to your system's PATH variable. Please run the suggested command in your PowerShell terminal to add `uv` to your PATH. Otherswise PowerShell will not recognize the `uv` command in the next step.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After the installation, you may see suggestions on the PowerShell terminal like `$env:Path = "C:\Users\username\.local\bin;$env:Path"` This means you need to manually add the `uv` executable to your system's PATH variable. Please run the suggested command in your PowerShell terminal to add `uv` to your PATH. Otherwise PowerShell will not recognize the `uv` command in the next step.
```

> Then make sure you are inside the `geospatial-python` directory you created during the data setup step. If not, please do:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then make sure you are inside the `geospatial-python` directory you created during the data setup step by doing:
```

```powershell

> cd <path-to-geospatial-python>

Reviewer: See above - Is this a working syntax on PowerShell @rogerkuou? 
```suggestion
cd ~/Desktop/geospatial-python
```

Author: No this doesn't... It can be my PowerShell version is too low, but let's accomondate to those users. I did not find an easy automation to get to home dir

I will do, then add a comment later to replace <Username> :

```suggestion
cd \Users\<Username>\Desktop\geospatial-python
```

```

> 

Author: ```suggestion

And replace the `<Username>` patter (including the angle brackets `<>`) with your Windows username.
```

Finally, run the following command to create a virtual environment and install the required dependencies:

```powershell

> uv venv --python=3.12; if ($LASTEXITCODE -eq 0) { uv pip install -r https://raw.githubusercontent.com/esciencecenter-digital-skills/geospatial-python/uv_setup/files/requirements.txt}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
uv venv --python=3.12; if ($LASTEXITCODE -eq 0) { uv pip install -r https://raw.githubusercontent.com/carpentries-incubator/geospatial-python/main/files/requirements.txt}
```

```

:::::::::::::::::::::::::

After the installation, a `.venv` directory will be created in the current directory, which contains the virtual environment with all the required dependencies.

### Testing the installation

> In order to follow the lesson, you should launch JupyterLab. Let's try it now to make sure everything is set up correctly. You can run the following command in your terminal from the `geospatial-python` directory:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to follow the lesson, you should launch JupyterLab. Let's try it now to make sure everything is set up correctly. You should run the following command in your terminal from the `geospatial-python` directory:
```

```

> uv run jupyter lab

Reviewer: Does the path change work on Windows PowerShell as well? If not, drop this suggestion
```suggestion
cd ~/Desktop/geospatial-python
uv run jupyter lab
```

Author: No it does not work... I will drop this one

cd ~/Desktop/geospatial-python
```

Finally, run the following command to create a virtual environment and install the required dependencies:

```sh
uv venv --python=3.12 && uv pip install -r https://raw.githubusercontent.com/carpentries-incubator/geospatial-python/main/files/requirements.txt
```

:::::::::::::::::::::::::

:::::::::::::::: solution

### Windows

On Windows, first we install `uv` using PowerShell following the [official installation instructions](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/getting-started/installation/):

```powershell
powershell -ExecutionPolicy ByPass -c "irm https://astral.sh/uv/install.ps1 | iex"
```

After the installation, you may see suggestions on the PowerShell terminal like `$env:Path = "C:\Users\username\.local\bin;$env:Path"` This means you need to manually add the `uv` executable to your system's PATH variable. Please run the suggested command in your PowerShell terminal to add `uv` to your PATH. Otherwise PowerShell will not recognize the `uv` command in the next step.

Then make sure you are inside the `geospatial-python` directory you created during the data setup step by doing:

```powershell
cd \Users\<Username>\Desktop\geospatial-python
```

> And replace the `<Username>` patter (including the angle brackets `<>`) with your Windows username.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And replace the `<Username>` pattern (including the angle brackets `<>`) with your Windows username.
```
